1) overview

   *) Jenkins is a powerful application that allows continuous integration and continuous delivery 
      of projects, regardless of the platform you are working on. It is a free source that can
      handle any kind of build or continuous integration. You can integrate Jenkins with a number
      of testing and deployment technologies. In this tutorial, we would explain how you can 
      use Jenkins to build and test your software projects continuously.

2) Why Jenkins?

  *) Jenkins is a software that allows continuous integration. Jenkins will be installed on
     a server where the central build will take place. 

3) Why Jenkins

 *) Along with Jenkins, sometimes, one might also see the association of Hudson. Hudson
    is a very popular open-source Java-based continuous integration tool developed by
    Sun Microsystems which was later acquired by Oracle. After the acquisition of 
    Sun by Oracle, a fork was created from the Hudson source code, which brought
   about the introduction of Jenkins.

4) What is Continuous Integration?

   *) Continuous Integration is a development practice that requires developers to 
      integrate code into a shared repository at regular intervals. This concept was 
      meant to remove the problem of finding later occurrence of issues in the build
      lifecycle. Continuous integration requires the developers to have frequent 
      builds. The common practice is that whenever a code commit occurs, 
      a build should be triggered.

5) System Requirements

   *) JDK:- 	JDK 1.5 or above
   *) Memory:-	2 GB RAM (recommended)
   *) Disk Space:- 	No minimum requirement. Note that since all builds will be stored
      on the Jenkins machines, it has to be ensured that sufficient disk space is 
      available for build storage.
   *)  Operating System Version:- Jenkins can be installed on Windows, 
       Ubuntu/Debian, Red Hat/Fedora/CentOS, Mac OS X, openSUSE, 
       FReeBSD, OpenBSD, Gentoo.
   *) Java Container:-	The WAR file can be run in any container that 
      supports Servlet 2.4/JSP 2.0 or later.(An example is Tomcat 5).



